--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 4 
Git + Github Exercises 
Git vs Github 
Git is a distributed revision control system. 
GitHub is a web-based Git repository hosting service. (BitBucket is another web site that offers
git hosting.) GitHub offers both public free accounts and paid plans for private repositories 
GitHub takes version control a step further by facilitating social coding. GitHub makes it easy
to contribute to other projects or accept contributes to a project you started. GitHub is located on
the web at github.com.
If you don’t already have an account at github, create one now. The free account option is
sufficient for this exercise.
There are GUI clients for using git, but the advantage of using the command line is:
1. It doesn’t change. Different GUI clients fall in and out of favor and how a GUI client
works can change from one version to another.
2. All major GUI clients also offer a command line option.
3. To debug a problem from a GUI interface, it helps to know the git command being
issued.
To check if you have git install on Ubuntu (https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/install-git
):
1. Open a terminal
2. Type git in the terminal, if you see a usage page, then you have git installed
3. If not, you can install git on Ubuntu by the following commands ($ is not part of the
command)
$sudo apt-get update
$sudo apt-get install git 
Lab Demo Procedure
1. Show me you have put a project on GitHub under your name. (50 points)
2. Show me how to clone a team project from GitHub, and make at least one code commit.
(50 points)
Submission
You can book a meeting with me and do a demo (for 10 minutes). Or, submit a link that
contains a demo recording (less than 10 minutes) with verbal comments in the Blackboard.
Not acceptable submission format: any email or any attachment, any video file, any zipped
file, a screenshot in the Blackboard. 

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 4 
!!!You will receive 0 credit if you submit anything other than a link as mentioned above.!!!
Please check the Blackboard for the due date. No submission is accepted after the due date. 
Exercise 2 – Putting a project on GitHub
This exercise will show you how to put a local project on GitHub.
• Creating a repository on github.com
• Committing and syncing (or pushing) changes to github
Step 1. In this example, the project is called HelloWorld
Step 2. Create a repository on GitHub of the same name. I recommend adding a README file
and .gitignore file.
Step 3. Use git client to clone repository just created:
git clone https://github.com/ReplaceWithYourProject.git
Step 4. Copy existing project files into folder/repository you just cloned.
Step 5. Add, commit, and push your changes:
git add -A
git commit -m "short description of change"
git push 
[git add . and git add –A are equivalent in git version 2: 
] 

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 4 
Exercise 3 – Cloning an existing repository (from your team GitHub repository)
Oftentimes the git repository will already exist on a remote server. The common scenario is you
join a project and want to modify existing documents or upload new ones. In cases like this, you
(1) create a local copy or clone of the repository, (2) add/modify existing documents. (3) push
your changes back to the central or upstream repository.
In this exercise, you will clone a repository, make a change to an existing file, and upload or
push your changes back to the server. 
Contact your team lead to add you as a collaborator (Settings->Manage access->Invite a
collaborator) 
See this link for different access permissions. 
Open one of the git shells (command line tools) you downloaded above. 
Get the URL to the remote repository (your team project) you want to clone.
The clone command will create a new directory for the cloned project. cd to the directory where
you want to create the new repository. Clone the remote repository with:
$ git clone https://github.com/<Team_Account_Name>/TeamProject.git 
To find the URL for your team project. 
The command above will create a new subdirectory TeamProject and initialize it with the remote
repository. Use the command cd (change directory) into the new directory:
$ cd TeamProject
Verify if the clone command created remote references to the remote repository: 

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 4 
$ git remote –v
Modify one of the downloaded files or add a new file to the directory (you may choose any text
editor you prefer, “vi/vim” is used below):
$ vi newfile or if “newfile” does not exist $ echo “new file contents” > newfile
$ git add newfile
$ git commit –m ‘practice changes’
To push your changes to the remote server:
$ git push
Browse github.com to verify new changes were uploaded correctly.
When you clone a repository with git clone, it automatically creates a remote connection called
origin pointing back to the cloned repository. You can verify this with the following command:
$ git remote -v
As time goes on others may push their changes to the central repository. On a regular basis you
should update your local copy with changes made on the central repository:
$ git pull origin master main
The default branch is changed from “master” to “main”. 

