--- Page 1 ---
CS 379 – Programming Languages | Studio 4 – Parameter Passing 
Overview
In this studio, you will extend your existing Mini-Interpreter to support parameter passing
by reference.
So far, all your functions pass arguments by value—each parameter receives a separate
copy of its argument.
Your goal is to enable a new mode where a function can declare parameters as references
using the ref keyword.
When called with ref, a function can modify the caller’s variable directly. 
Learning Objectives
• Distinguish between call-by-value and call-by-reference.
• Extend your existing parser to recognize ref parameters.
• Modify your interpreter to correctly handle reference semantics for variables and
array elements.
• Test your interpreter with pytest from the command line.
• Explain how reference variables interact with the environment and call stack. 
Setup
Use the interpreter you have built through Studios 1 – 3.
Make sure it successfully runs the previous studio tests (functions, scope, return values).
You will now add support for reference parameters.
Testing may be done using pytest from the terminal. 
Part A — Grammar & Parser
1. Open your interpreter and locate the Parser class.
2. Inside the function method, find where parameters are parsed. You should see logic
similar to: 

--- Page 2 ---
if self.match('REF'): is_ref = True
ident = self.consume('IDENT', 'Expected parameter name')
params.append((is_ref, ident))
3. Verify that your parser correctly detects the 'ref' keyword and records each
parameter as a tuple (is_ref, token).
4. No lexer edits are needed—REF should already be defined as a keyword.
5. If you prefer modularity, you may move this code into a helper method like
parse_param() and call it from inside function(). 
Part B — Interpreter & Runtime Behavior
1. Open your UserFunction.call method.
2. Ensure that reference parameters bind directly to Reference objects rather than
values:
for (is_ref, tok), arg in zip(self.params, args):    
if is_ref:        
if not isinstance(arg, (Reference, ArrayIndexRef)):            
raise TypeError('ref parameter needs variable or arr[i]')        
local.define(tok.lexeme, arg)    
else:        
local.define(tok.lexeme, arg)
3. In your Interpreter.evaluate method, find the section that handles Call
expressions.
4. Verify that when a callee’s parameter is marked ref, the corresponding argument is
wrapped as a Reference or ArrayIndexRef object before invocation.
5. Confirm that normal arguments (without ref) continue to pass values by copy. 
Part C — Testing Your Interpreter 

--- Page 3 ---
You will validate your implementation with pytest.
From your project directory (where your interpreter file resides), run:
pytest -v test_s4_ref_vs_value.py  
Each test checks a different behavior of your parameter-passing logic.
All must pass before submission.  

